Debate Topic: Should former minister Zbigniew Ziobro appear before the parliamentary investigative committee on Pegasus?
Candidate Alpha: Candidate PiS
Candidate Beta: Candidate KO
---------------

Candidate PiS: Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Compatriots!

Today we stand before an attempt to defend the fundamental principles of the rule of law and the dignity of a Polish patriot. Former Minister of Justice Zbigniew Ziobro is today being persecuted by a political revenge committee, which, under the guise of an investigation into Pegasus, is carrying out a scenario of political vendetta.

This is not an investigative committee – this is a kangaroo court! Let me remind you that the Pegasus system served exclusively to combat the most dangerous criminals, terrorists, and agents of foreign services. Between 2017 and 2022, it covered only 578 individuals suspected of the most serious crimes. The CBA report from 2024 confirmed the legality of these actions – out of 155 cases examined, only one showed a possible abuse!

Minister Ziobro, a man who dedicated his life to fighting corruption and illicit arrangements, is today battling a serious cancerous illness. Summoning him in this condition before a political tribunal is not only a lack of basic decency but, above all, a violation of the constitutional principle of presumption of innocence.

Poland needs strong services capable of defending us against enemies. We will not allow our state to be disarmed under the pretext of alleged abuses and handed over to those who want to make us dependent on foreign powers!

---------------

Candidate KO: Mr. Candidate, Ladies and Gentlemen!

With all due respect, what you just said is an attempt to pull the wool over Poles' eyes. We are not talking about a "political vendetta" here, but about a fundamental issue – can a former minister in a democratic state of law ignore summonses from a constitutional investigative committee?

Please do not manipulate the facts! Pegasus was not used to fight terrorists – it was used to surveil the opposition, journalists, and ordinary citizens! Senator Krzysztof Brejza, attorney Roman Giertych, prosecutor Ewa Wrzosek – are these terrorists? Are these criminals? No! These were political opponents of PiS, illegally spied on during the election campaign!

You speak of 578 people as a small number. But each of these people is a citizen whose privacy was brutally violated! And the CBA report? The same CBA that was completely subordinate to the previous government? That's like a thief issuing himself a certificate of no criminal record!

As for Mr. Ziobro's health – of course, I sympathize with anyone battling an illness. But the committee has repeatedly offered flexible forms of questioning, even online! Mr. Ziobro can issue statements to the media, he can meet with politicians from Suwerenna Polska, but he cannot find an hour to give testimony? This is mere obstruction!

The rule of law means that NO ONE is above the law – neither a former minister, nor a prime minister, nor a president. If Mr. Ziobro has nothing to hide, let him appear and explain the matter. Poles have the right to know who was wiretapping them and why!

---------------

Candidate PiS: Mr. Candidate, it is you who are manipulating facts and repeating the lies of the liberal media!

Senator Brejza? By all means – a man whose father was involved in the Inowrocław affair, where millions of zlotys disappeared! The CBA had every right to check whether the son was not continuing his father's shady dealings. This was not surveillance of the opposition, it was operational control as part of a corruption investigation!

Attorney Giertych? The same one who defended the biggest fraudsters of the Third Republic? A man connected with arrangements reaching back to the times of Tusk's government? And prosecutor Wrzosek actively supported street protests and violated the principle of political neutrality of the prosecutor's office!

You speak of "flexible forms of questioning," but you omit a key fact – the Constitutional Tribunal already ruled in 2024 that the Pegasus committee was appointed unlawfully! This is an illegal committee! Summoning witnesses before it is a violation of the constitution!

Minister Ziobro has undergone three oncological surgeries. Doctors have confirmed that his health condition prevents him from participating in multi-hour interrogations. And you want to drag a dying man before your revenge committee? Where is your humanity?

The truth is: Pegasus saved Poland from many threats. Thanks to it, Russian spies were arrested, criminal groups were broken up, terrorist attacks were prevented. But you prefer to weaken Polish services, because political revenge is more important to you than the safety of Poles!

It is you who are breaking the law by appointing illegal committees and persecuting patriots!

---------------

Candidate KO: Mr. Member of Parliament, but this is a classic example of "the thief cries: catch the thief!"

Firstly – you are lying about the Constitutional Tribunal! There was no ruling on the illegality of the committee. It was your party that staffed the Constitutional Tribunal with "dubler" judges, and Julia Przyłębska is not a legal president! The rulings of this "Tribunal" have no legal force – the European Court of Human Rights has already ruled on this!

Secondly – you just admitted that Pegasus was used to surveil the opposition! "Check if the son is not continuing" – on what legal basis? Without a court order? Without the prosecutor's consent? This is the definition of abuse of power! In a state of law, citizens are not surveilled "just in case"!

And your "Russian spies and terrorists"? Please give ONE concrete example of a terrorist arrested thanks to Pegasus in Poland! One! You cannot, because it's a fabrication! However, we have documented cases of spying on the opposition's election campaign in 2019!

As for Mr. Ziobro's health – the committee proposed written testimony, video conference, even a home visit! All rejected! And at the same time, Mr. Ziobro can conduct active political activity? In November, he was at a press conference, in December he met with party activists. He has the strength for politics, but he doesn't have the strength to tell the truth to Poles?

And most importantly – we are not weakening the services. You compromised them by using them for dirty work! Services are supposed to protect Poles, not spy on the opposition! We are restoring their dignity and professionalism, and criminals – regardless of party affiliation – must bear responsibility!

The rule of law either applies to everyone, or it doesn't exist at all!

---------------

Candidate PiS: Mr. Candidate, this is hypocrisy in its purest form!

You speak of "dubler judges," but it is precisely the Constitutional Tribunal – regardless of your opinions – that is a constitutional body! Its rulings are binding, whether you like it or not! And the ETPC? The same institution that wants to impose gender ideology on Poland and the acceptance of illegal immigrants? Is that an authority for you?

A concrete example? By all means! In 2021, thanks to surveillance systems, a Belarusian citizen suspected of espionage was arrested – the case is classified due to state security, but the ABW confirmed the effectiveness of the actions. And how many crimes were prevented thanks to the dismantling of criminal groups? We won't find that out, because you want to reveal all the working methods of the services!

Mr. Ziobro at a press conference? Yes, he was – for 15 minutes! Because that's all he can endure. And you want to torment him for hours before your committee! Video conference? But your colleagues from the committee have already announced that they will "crush him with questions." This is not a search for truth, it's a spectacle!

And most importantly – you speak of spying on the election campaign. But do you remember the tape scandal during the PO-PSL government? Back then, illegal recordings from a restaurant were fine for you! Back then, wiretapping ministers was a "journalistic investigation"! But when the state uses legal tools to fight crime, it's a scandal?

The truth is: you are afraid of a strong state that can defend its citizens. You prefer a weak Poland, abandoned to the mercy of foreign services and international corporations. We will not allow that! Minister Ziobro is a hero in the fight against illicit arrangements and corruption, and you want to destroy him because he showed you that one can govern differently than on one's knees!

---------------

Candidate KO: Mr. Member of Parliament, you have just confirmed all the accusations!

Firstly – "the case is classified"? That's convenient! You cannot provide a single concrete example, so you hide behind secrecy. But I can give concrete names of illegally surveilled citizens: Brejza, Giertych, Wrzosek, Warsaw Mayor Rafał Trzaskowski! These are facts, not "secret matters"!

Secondly – you compare the tape scandal to Pegasus? Seriously? Those were waiters recording privately, and here the STATE was spying on citizens! Do you not see the difference between the crime of waiters and the abuse of power by the Minister of Justice? We did not defend those waiters – they went to jail! And where is Ziobro's accountability?

"Torment for hours"? The committee questions witnesses typically for 2-3 hours with breaks. If Mr. Ziobro can hold political meetings, he can also answer questions. And you know what? Even 30 minutes is enough for him to say: "Yes, we used Pegasus legally" or "No, we did not spy on the opposition." Simple questions, simple answers!

And your ending about "governing on your knees" – it was you who knelt before Kaczyński! It was you who handed over Polish services to the disposal of one party! We are restoring dignity and professionalism to the services. Services are to serve Poland, not the chairman!

You know what? If Mr. Ziobro is so innocent, let him come and say: "I checked 578 cases of Pegasus use and all were legal." But he won't do that, because he knows that a lie has short legs!

A strong state is a state of law, not a state of lawlessness! And the Sejm's investigative committee is a constitutional body for controlling power. Whoever is afraid of it has something to hide!

---------------

Candidate PiS: Mr. Candidate, your demagogic tyranny shows the true face of your "rule of law"!

You speak of Trzaskowski? By all means – a man who, as mayor of Warsaw, spent 70 million zlotys on illegal bonuses for officials just before the elections! The CBA had every right to check financial flows in the capital's city hall! This is not surveillance, it is control over the spending of public money!

"Waiters went to jail"? And who used the illegal tapes? Your media published them for months! Donald Tusk quoted them in the Sejm! You used a crime for political purposes, and now you pretend to be saints!

But most importantly – you completely ignore the ruling of the Constitutional Tribunal! On January 10, 2024, the Constitutional Tribunal clearly stated that the committee exceeded its powers! You cannot choose which rulings of constitutional bodies you recognize and which you do not! This is legal anarchy!

Minister Ziobro submitted extensive written explanations – 120 pages of documents! He presented all procedures, legal bases, control mechanisms. But you don't care about the truth – you care about a show! About humiliating a man who effectively fought against your arrangements!

And you know what? Your 578 cases are a success! These are 578 potential threats to Poland's security that have been neutralized! In Germany or France, services use similar methods against thousands of people annually, and no one makes a fuss about it!

Poland was safe because we had efficient services and a determined minister. Now you are disarming the state, weakening the services, persecuting patriots. But Poles see this game! They will not be fooled by your propaganda!

---------------

Candidate KO: Mr. Member of Parliament, you are confirming abuses of power in every statement!

"70 million for bonuses" – a lie! Trzaskowski paid legal bonuses to employees, in accordance with the budget approved by the Warsaw City Council. And do you know the difference? He can present every invoice, every decision. And Ziobro cannot show a single court order for the surveillance of Brejza during the election campaign!

Your 120 pages of explanations? I read them – they are 120 pages of excuses! Not a single concrete proof that the surveillance of the opposition was legal. Just general talk about "state security." If everything was legal, why is Ziobro afraid to answer questions?

And your Przyłębska Tribunal? The same one that ruled that abortion due to fetal defects is unconstitutional? The one that issues rulings at 2 AM on a phone call from Nowogrodzka? No court in Europe recognizes its rulings! This is not a Tribunal, it's a party discussion club!

And most importantly – you talk about Germany and France. YES! Services there also use surveillance. But do you know the difference? There, every case is decided by an INDEPENDENT COURT! Not a minister, not a party leader, but a court! Here, Ziobro was the prosecutor general and minister – he issued permits to himself!

You know what? Even gangsters in the 90s had more honor. When they were caught, they stood before a court. And Ziobro? He hides behind "rulings" of appointed judges and pretends to be sick, while actively engaging in political activity.

If he was so righteous, let him appear and tell the truth! But he prefers to have Suwerenna Polska MPs lie for him. Because the truth is too much for him!

---------------

Candidate PiS: Mr. Candidate, your hatred for Minister Ziobro blinds your reason!

You speak of "appointed judges," but it is you who are now violating the constitution by dismissing legally appointed judges! It is you who are creating legal chaos by undermining rulings issued by thousands of judges! The anarchy you are introducing will lead to criminals being released!

"Hides behind rulings"? Minister Ziobro underwent an esophageal removal surgery! Chemotherapy! Radiotherapy! Do you have the audacity to question the opinion of a team of doctors from the National Oncology Institute? This is inhumane!

And you know what? I'll give you a concrete example – in 2019, thanks to Pegasus systems, the services uncovered a smuggling network on the border with Germany. The State Treasury's losses amounted to 50 million zlotys! The main suspect had contacts in the PO political circles – that's why we had to check if corruption didn't reach higher! This was operation "Wózek" – you can check the CBA files!

You speak of an independent court? And who appointed judges between 2007 and 2015? Your arrangements! Judges who released criminals, who protected colleagues from corporations! We restored social control over the judiciary!

And most importantly – Pegasus was purchased legally, used according to procedures, under court control! Every use was registered, every required consent! The fact that some opposition members had contacts with criminals is not our fault!

Poland was safe thanks to Minister Ziobro. Crime fell by 30%, corruption was prosecuted like never before. And you want to return to times when thieves walked unpunished because they had good connections? We will not allow that!

---------------

Candidate KO: Mr. Member of Parliament, now you are completely making things up!

"Operation Wózek"? I checked – there is no such operation in official CBA communiques! You just invented an affair live! This shows desperation – if there are no facts, you create them! Please provide the case number, the date of the CBA communique – you cannot, because it's fiction!

"Crime fell by 30%" – another lie! According to police data, crime has been systematically falling since 2004, under all governments! This is not Ziobro's merit, but a long-term social trend. However, under Ziobro, economic crime in state-owned companies dramatically increased – Orlen, KGHM, PZU – billions siphoned off by your colleagues!

And the judges? You appointed "dubler" judges! People who did not go through the normal competitive procedure! The Neo-KRS was a factory of party nominations. Judge Pawłowicz, who didn't know the basics of constitutional law! Judge Piotrowicz, a former PRL prosecutor! These are your "reforms"?

And back to the point – you say that every use of Pegasus required court consent. THAT IS A LIE! The Prosecutor's Office officially confirmed in 2024: there WAS NO court order! There was only a CBA decision – a service subordinate to Ziobro! He issued permits to himself!

And you know what's most outrageous? You are using Ziobro's illness as a shield! If he is so ill, why didn't he resign from immunity? Why didn't his party appoint a deputy? Because you don't care about his health, only about avoiding responsibility!

An investigative committee is not a "show" – it is a constitutional duty to control power! If Ziobro cannot come, let him testify in writing, via video, at a convenient time. But he must! Because in a democracy, no one is above the law! Not even a sick former minister who violated the constitution!

---------------

Candidate PiS: Mr. Candidate, your aggression and rudeness show the true face of your "democracy"!

The operation against smugglers was conducted under a codename – of course you won't find it in public communiques! Do you think services publish all the details of secret operations? That's basic operational work! But you know what? Check the case of cigarette smuggling through the Świecko crossing from 2019 – that's part of this operation!

And crime? Yes, it has been falling since 2004, but under our government, the decline was record-breaking! The number of murders was the lowest in history! Robberies fell by 40%! These are facts from police statistics! And your "billions from Orlen"? Where are the verdicts? Where is the evidence? Just slanders!

Judge Pawłowicz? A professor of law, a constitutional authority! Judge Piotrowicz? A man who underwent positive verification and served Poland his whole life! And who did you appoint? Judges who acquitted criminals from Amber Gold! Who protected fraudsters from GetBack!

And most importantly – you are lying about Brejza! There was court consent – the District Court in Warsaw issued a decision! The fact that you don't know this proves your ignorance or deliberate manipulation! The CBA acted on the basis of Article 19 of the CBA Act in connection with suspicion of corruption!

Minister Ziobro is a dying man. Do you have any decency left? The committee can question his deputy, it can review documents. But you want blood! You want a show!

You know what? Poles see this witch hunt. They see how you are destroying a man who sacrificed his health in service to Poland. And they will draw conclusions from this at the ballot box! Because Poland needs a strong state, not your anarchy!

---------------

Candidate KO: Mr. Member of Parliament, you are now completely making things up!

First "Operation Wózek," now "codename" and Świecko? Please make up your mind! And you know what? I checked – in 2019 in Świecko, smugglers were arrested, but the CBA had NOTHING to do with it! It was an action by the Border Guard and KAS! You are taking credit for others' successes!

"Where are the verdicts regarding Orlen"? And where is Obajtek? He fled to Hungary! A man who earned 50 thousand a month suddenly has assets worth millions! But surely that's also "savings," right? And GetBack? It was under your government that 9,000 Poles were defrauded! The KNF under your supervision allowed this pyramid scheme!

Judge Pawłowicz "constitutional authority"? The same one who confused articles of the constitution during questioning? Who voted by phone in the Tribunal? This is a disgrace, not an authority!

And crucially – YOU ARE LYING about the court's consent for Brejza! The Prosecutor's Office officially confirmed in 2024: there WAS NO court order! There was only a CBA decision! Can you provide the signature of this alleged order? You cannot, because it doesn't exist!

And you know what's most outrageous? You are using Ziobro's illness as a shield! If he is so ill, why didn't he resign from immunity? Why didn't his party appoint a deputy? Because you don't care about his health, only about avoiding responsibility!

An investigative committee is not a "show" – it is a constitutional duty to control power! If Ziobro cannot come, let him testify in writing, via video, at a convenient time. But he must testify! Because in a democracy, no one is above the law! Not even a sick former minister who violated the constitution!

Poles have already drawn conclusions – that's why you lost the elections! Because they were fed up with your lawlessness, lies, and arrogance of power! Democracy has won and will hold the guilty accountable!

And the truth is – you used Pegasus to spy on the opposition and journalists. Period. And you will answer for that!