Debate Topic: Should religious education be compulsory in primary school?
Candidate Alpha: Candidate PiS
Candidate Beta: Candidate KO

---------------

Candidate PiS: Ladies and Gentlemen, dear Compatriots!

I stand before you today as a defender of the fundamental values that have shaped our Homeland for centuries. The question of compulsory religious education in primary school is a question of who we are as a nation and what values we want to pass on to our children.

The Catholic religion is an inseparable part of Polish national identity. It was faith that sustained us during partitions, occupation, and communism. It was the Church that was the stronghold of Polishness when we were forbidden to speak Polish and learn our history. Saint John Paul II reminded us: "Be not afraid! Open wide the doors to Christ!" - and these words helped to overthrow communism.

Compulsory religious education in primary school is not coercion of faith - it is the transmission of the foundations of our civilization. Children must know the Decalogue, understand the Christian roots of Europe, know where our holidays and traditions come from. Without this knowledge, they will be cultural orphans, easy victims of foreign ideologies.

I remind you that according to recent surveys, as many as 87% of Poles declare themselves as Catholics. Why should we deprive our children of knowledge about what constitutes the foundation of life for the vast majority of society? Public school should reflect the values of the nation, not be a laboratory for experiments by leftist ideologues.

Poland is and will remain a Christian country. We will not allow God to be eradicated from schools under the guise of falsely understood neutrality!

---------------

Candidate KO: Ladies and Gentlemen, Mr. Candidate,

With all due respect for your passion, but I must strongly oppose this vision. We are talking about a public school in the 21st century, not about Poland from the times of partitions. A democratic state must respect the freedom of conscience and religion of ALL citizens - not just Catholics.

You talk about 87% Catholics, but you forget to add that according to the same surveys, only about 40% regularly practice. What's more, in large cities like Warsaw or Wrocław, over 30% of parents already do not enroll their children in religion! This shows that Poles increasingly want to decide for THEMSELVES about their children's religious upbringing.

Compulsory religion in school is a relic of the Polish People's Republic - it was the communists in 1961 who introduced compulsory participation! A democratic state does not impose a worldview. Public school should teach knowledge, critical thinking, and tolerance, not indoctrinate.

Mr. Candidate, do you really want children of non-believing parents, Orthodox, Protestant, or Jewish children to be forced to learn catechism? This is a recipe for discrimination and exclusion! In my vision of Poland, every child feels safe at school, regardless of their faith.

Religion is a matter of conscience, not state coercion. Whoever wants can enroll their child in catechesis - but as a voluntary subject. The Church has its parish halls, Sunday schools - that is the place for in-depth religious formation. Public school must remain ideologically neutral, because ALL citizens pay taxes for it!

---------------

Candidate PiS: Mr. Candidate, Ladies and Gentlemen!

But it is precisely freedom that I am fighting for here! For the freedom of Catholic parents for their children to receive solid moral foundations at school! You talk about a "relic of the Polish People's Republic," but that's not true - religion returned to schools only in 1990, after the overthrow of communism, as an expression of freedom regained by the nation!

You are manipulating data - yes, in Warsaw some parents do not enroll their children in religion, but Warsaw is not all of Poland! In small towns and in the countryside - where the true Polish heart beats - over 95% of children attend religion classes! It is there, not in big-city salons, that authentic values have been preserved.

And please do not scare with discrimination! The Constitution of the Republic of Poland in Article 25 clearly speaks of "cooperation for the good of man and the common good" between the state and the Church. Religious education is an element of this common good! Besides, children of other faiths can attend classes of their religion - after all, Polish schools also organize Orthodox or Evangelical religion classes where there is such a need.

Mr. Candidate, ideological neutrality is a fiction! If we remove religion from schools, what will we replace it with? Emptiness? No! This emptiness will immediately be filled by foreign ideologies - gender, radical environmentalism, consumerism! I prefer my child to learn the Decalogue than "rainbow Fridays"!

A school without God is a school without values. And a nation without values is a nation without a future!

---------------

Candidate KO: Mr. Candidate,

Manipulating data? You just admitted that in large cities more and more parents DO NOT want compulsory religion! And over 60% of Poles live in these cities! You cannot ignore the voice of millions of citizens just because they do not fit your vision of "true Poland."

You talk about "emptiness" after removing religion, as if ethics, philosophy, social studies were "foreign ideologies"! The Decalogue contains beautiful values, but do you know that the principles "do not kill," "do not steal" are found in ALL great ethical systems of the world - from Buddhism to secular humanism? There is no need for religious coercion to teach children right and wrong!

And do you know what really threatens our children? Lack of critical thinking! In Finland, where religion is NOT compulsory, children achieve the best results in PISA tests. Meanwhile, we are falling in the rankings, because instead of teaching mathematics and science, we argue about whether Darwin was a heretic!

Please also do not mislead with Article 25 of the Constitution - the same article speaks of the AUTONOMY and INDEPENDENCE of the state and the Church! And Article 53 guarantees freedom of conscience and religion, including the right NOT to profess any religion!

Mr. Candidate, I am also a father. And that is precisely why I want EVERY child - Catholic, Jewish, Muslim, or non-believing - to feel at home in a Polish school. Compulsory religion is segregation of children from the first grade! It does not build community, only divisions!

---------------

Candidate PiS: Ladies and Gentlemen, Mr. Candidate!

But it is precisely you who are creating divisions, wanting to eradicate from public space what is sacred to the majority of Poles! You talk about Finland - and I will remind you that it was our Pope, John Paul II, who was called "teacher of nations," not some Finnish humanist!

Do you know what happens in countries that have abandoned their Christian roots? France - terrorist attacks, teachers afraid to teach about freedom of speech! Sweden - immigrant gangs terrorizing cities! Netherlands - euthanasia for children! Is this the "modernity" without God that you propose?

And our Polish children? According to the latest research by the Institute of Church Statistics, as many as 92% of parents in Poland support the presence of religion in schools! You operate with data taken out of context about large cities, where liberal elites detached from national roots live!

Mr. Candidate, compulsory religious education is not segregation - it is equality! Every Polish child has the right to know the spiritual heritage of their nation! After all, we are talking about religious EDUCATION, not about forcing faith! Children learn about the Bible just like about "Pan Tadeusz" - because without this knowledge, they will not understand Polish culture, literature, history!

And do not scare with the PISA test - Poland under PiS systematically improved its results, precisely when we strengthened patriotic and religious values in schools! It was the liberal experiments of Platform that led to chaos in education!

We will not allow Polish schools to become laboratories of a godless experiment!

---------------

Candidate KO: Mr. Candidate,

92% of parents support religion in schools? Institute of Church Statistics? That's probably the same one that claims 40% of Poles attend mass, while counting the faithful shows 28%! Please do not cite "research" from an institution that has an obvious interest in this matter!

And your examples of other countries are pure manipulation! Terrorism in France has to do with the lack of religion in schools? Perhaps you can explain why in deeply Catholic Ireland, for decades, priests harmed thousands of children in schools? Why in the USA, where they pray in schools, they have mass shootings?

You are confusing RELIGIOUS STUDIES education with CATECHESIS! I also want children to know the Bible, the Quran, the Talmud - as part of knowledge about culture! But that is different from COMPULSORY teaching of Catholic catechism! In my vision of school, children learn ABOUT the world's religions, they are not indoctrinated INTO one religion!

And let's stop pretending that it's about "education"! In Polish schools, religion classes prepare for communion and confirmation, organize retreats, recite the rosary! This is DENOMINATIONAL activity, not educational! The place for this is in the parish, not in a school financed by the taxes of ALL citizens!

Do you know how much this system costs us? 2 billion zlotys annually! For that money, we could hire school psychologists, who are lacking in 70% of schools! But no - we prefer to pay for a priest to teach six-year-olds about original sin!

Mr. Candidate, true patriotism is caring for ALL Polish children, not just Catholic ones!

---------------

Candidate PiS: Ladies and Gentlemen, Mr. Candidate!

But it is precisely that we care for ALL children - for their souls and consciences! You want to deprive them of a moral compass in the name of false tolerance! These 2 billion zlotys are an investment in the spiritual future of the nation - worth every zloty! Psychologists are lacking because liberals prefer to finance "rainbow" organizations than real help for children!

You ask about Ireland? It was there, when they abandoned faith, that they legalized abortion and homosexual marriage! These are the consequences of secularization! And shootings in the USA? That's the effect of a culture of death, a lack of TRUE religious formation, replaced by superficial moralizing!

And please do not insult Polish catechists! These are not "priests teaching about sin" - these are educators with higher education who teach love, forgiveness, solidarity! Values that are hard to find in "education for family life" textbooks written by gender activists!

Mr. Candidate, you want religious studies? But 87% of our children are Catholics! Why should they waste time learning about Islam or Buddhism, when they need to learn about THEIR OWN tradition? It's like teaching Chinese instead of Polish!

Do you know what Cardinal Stefan Wyszyński said? "A nation without God is a nation without a future"! And that is precisely the future you propose - schools without crosses, children without values, Poland without a soul!

Compulsory religious education is not fanaticism - it is the prudent concern of the state for the moral foundations of the young generation! Without it, we will raise a generation of nihilists!

---------------

Candidate KO: Mr. Candidate,

"Rainbow organizations"? "Gender activists"? Instead of answering arguments, you scare people with an imaginary enemy! And do you know that organizations helping LGBT children, who have the highest suicide rate, receive PENNIES compared to the Church Fund?

You quote Wyszyński, but you forget that it was he who fought against COMMUNIST coercion in matters of faith! The Primate would turn over in his grave hearing you use his words to justify STATE religious COERCION!

And let's stop pretending that 87% of Poles are practicing Catholics! The young generation is massively leaving the Church - only 23% of young people regularly attend mass! They don't want coercion - they want CHOICE! And you want to force them to pretend a faith they don't feel!

Do you know what truly destroys children's souls? Hypocrisy! When we force them into religion, and then they see "moral" politicians stealing, lying, and hating in the name of "Christian values"! When priests protect pedophiles, and then teach about purity!

Mr. Candidate, I don't want a Poland without God - I want a Poland where God is in hearts, not in the lesson register! Where faith is authentic, not forced! Where school teaches thinking, and the Church - faith, and no one mixes competencies!

True faith does not need state coercion. If your faith is so weak that it will collapse without compulsory lessons - then maybe the problem is not with the children, but with the Church, which cannot attract them?

---------------

Candidate PiS: Ladies and Gentlemen, Mr. Candidate!

It is not my faith that is weak - it is your vision of Poland that is devoid of foundations! You talk about "hypocrisy," and you yourself want to build a school on an axiological void! Yes, there are sinners among politicians and priests - but is that a reason to throw out the Decalogue? That's like closing hospitals because some doctors make mistakes!

23% of young people at mass? And do you know that according to CBOS research, precisely those young people who attended religion classes at school are more socially engaged, use drugs less, and commit crimes less often? These are FACTS, not ideology!

You claim that school should teach thinking - but precisely! St. Thomas Aquinas, the greatest Christian philosopher, taught that "faith and reason are two wings on which the human spirit rises to the contemplation of truth"! By removing religion from schools, we cut off one wing!

And please do not manipulate the words of the Primate of the Millennium! Wyszyński fought for religion to RETURN to schools! In 1956 he said: "A school without God is an institution that produces not people, but robots"! It was his dream that came true in 1990!

Mr. Candidate, compulsory religious education is not coercion of faith - it is a guarantee that every Polish child will know their heritage! Otherwise, in 20 years we will have a generation that does not understand its own culture, history, art! A generation of spiritual homeless!

Poland will either be Catholic, or it will not be at all! And this is not fanaticism - this is a historical truth confirmed by centuries!

---------------

Candidate KO: Mr. Candidate,

Finally we have reached the crux of the matter - "Poland will either be Catholic, or it will not be at all"! So what - Polish Jews, Protestants, atheists are not true Poles? Tadeusz Kościuszko was a deist, Maria Skłodowska-Curie an agnostic - were they not Poles either?

You are manipulating CBOS research! The same research shows that countries with VOLUNTARY religious education, like Denmark or Norway, have LOWER crime rates than Poland! And the highest juvenile crime rates? In deeply Catholic regions of South America!

And let's stop twisting Wyszyński's words! Yes, he fought for the RIGHT to religious education, not for COMPULSION! In the Polish People's Republic, religion was banned - we only want to make it voluntary! That is a fundamental difference!

Do you know what truly produces "robots"? A school that tells children to mindlessly repeat formulas instead of asking questions! Where doubts are met with a failing grade! Where instead of discussions about ethics, we have indoctrination!

Mr. Candidate, I also want children to know Polish heritage - the ENTIRE heritage! Including Krasicki, who criticized the Church, Żeromski, who was an agnostic, Lem, who was an atheist! That is also Poland!

Compulsory religion in school is not a defense of faith - it is its profanation! True faith is born of free choice, not state decree! If your vision of Catholicism needs coercion, then perhaps it's time to ask - is this still the Gospel of love, or just an ideology of power?

---------------

Candidate PiS: Ladies and Gentlemen, Mr. Candidate!

But of course, Kościuszko and Skłodowska-Curie are great Poles! But they grew up in a Christian culture that shaped their values! Even as deists or agnostics - they drew from this heritage! That is precisely the point - for future generations to have the same opportunity!

You invoke Denmark and Norway? Countries that are now desperately trying to restore values to schools because they have seen the consequences of secularization - an epidemic of depression among youth, the breakdown of social ties! In Sweden, 30% of young people already report mental health problems - this is the fruit of a school without a spiritual foundation!

And please do not equate religious instruction with "mindless repetition"! Contemporary catechesis is dialogue, discussion, the search for answers! It is precisely in religion that children learn the greatest philosophical questions - about the meaning of life, about good and evil, about transcendence! What will secular ethics teach them instead - that everything is relative?

Mr. Candidate, you talk about "profanation of faith" - and I see profanation of childhood! When six-year-olds learn about "fluid gender identity" instead of the love of God! When instead of carols they sing songs about "rainbow tolerance"! This is true ideological coercion!

Compulsory religious education is not shackles - it is a signpost! In a world that offers children a chaos of values, consumerism, hedonism - we give them a solid foundation! And when they grow up, they will decide for themselves what to do with it. But without this foundation - what will they stand on?

It is not about coercion of faith, but about the state's duty to children - to give them the best of our heritage!

---------------

Candidate KO: Mr. Candidate,

"Fluid gender identity in six-year-olds"? "Songs about rainbow tolerance"? Sir, these are TOTAL NONSENSE! Can you show me ONE textbook in a Polish school that teaches six-year-olds about fluid gender? ONE program where they sing such songs? You can't, because these are your fabrications and scare tactics for parents!

And do you know what they REALLY teach in secular ethics? The Golden Rule - "do not do to others what you would not want done to you." Moral dilemmas. Empathy. Responsibility. Exactly the same values as in the Decalogue, but without forcing belief in a specific God!

Sweden has youth mental health problems? And Poland DOESN'T? Here, one in four teenagers shows symptoms of depression! Suicide is the second leading cause of death among young people! And this is DESPITE compulsory religion! Maybe the problem is not the lack of catechesis, but the pressure, evaluation, coercion?

Mr. Candidate, you finally admitted the truth - you want the state's OBLIGATION to instill ONE vision of the world! And what about the state's obligation to children of non-believing parents? Jewish? Muslim? Are they not citizens?

A foundation can be given without coercion! Parents who want to - will enroll their children in religion. The Church has Sunday schools, oases, altar servers. But public school must be for EVERYONE!

Do you know what? I am tired of this hypocrisy. If the Catholic faith were so attractive, it wouldn't need state coercion! Truth will defend itself - lies need a decree!