Debate Topic: Should Hawaiian pizza be banned in public spaces?
Candidate Alpha: Candidate PiS
Candidate Beta: Candidate KO

---------------

Candidate PiS: Ladies and Gentlemen, dear Compatriots!

Today we face a question that may seem trivial, but in essence it touches upon the fundamental values of our civilization. Hawaiian pizza – it is a symbol of the invasion of foreign, incomprehensible culinary trends into our traditional, Christian Europe.

As Saint John Paul II used to say: "Man is great not by what he possesses, but by what he is." And who are we, Poles? We are a nation with a thousand-year tradition, heirs of a great Latin culture. We cannot allow our children to be raised in a world where pineapples on pizza are treated as the norm!

This is not just a matter of taste – it is a matter of identity. Italy, the cradle of pizza, has officially condemned this culinary aberration. In 2017, the Italian Minister of Agriculture called Hawaiian pizza a "culinary crime against tradition." Are we, Poles, to be worse than Italians in defending European heritage?

I propose introducing a "Charter for the Protection of Culinary Traditions" – a document that will prohibit serving Hawaiian pizza in schools, offices, and other public institutions. We must protect our children from culinary demoralization! Let us remember: a strong Poland is a Poland faithful to its roots.

---------------

Candidate KO: Ladies and Gentlemen, Mr. Member of Parliament Kowalski,

With all due respect, but is the biggest problem in Poland in 2025 really... pineapple on pizza? When families worry about electricity bills, when young people cannot buy an apartment, when seniors wait months for a specialist appointment – you propose a "Charter for the Protection of Culinary Traditions"?

This is precisely the problem with your group – instead of dealing with the real problems of Poles, you create artificial cultural wars. Hawaiian pizza? Really? Is this supposed to be a priority for the Polish state?

Please tell me – how much would it cost to inspect every pizzeria in Poland? Who would check if by chance some entrepreneur didn't put pineapple on the dough? Maybe we should create a special "culinary police"? This sounds like a comedy script, not a serious political proposal!

And do you know what? In a 2023 CBOS survey, as many as 34% of Poles admitted they like Hawaiian pizza. That's millions of our citizens! Do you want to ban their choice? Is this the freedom you so often talk about?

I am for freedom – freedom of choice, freedom of enterprise, freedom to decide what we eat. The state should not interfere with people's plates. This is not Belarus or Russia, where the authorities decide on every aspect of citizens' lives. This is a free Poland, a member of the European Union!

Let's focus on real problems – on healthcare, education, security. And let's leave pizza to Poles. Let everyone eat what they want!

---------------

Candidate PiS: Mr. Member of Parliament Kowalski, but this is typical liberal rhetoric – downplaying matters of culture and identity!

Please do not manipulate – no one is saying this is Poland's biggest problem. But should we therefore ignore the disintegration of our civilization? After all, under the rule of Law and Justice, we showed that it is possible to simultaneously raise 500+ to 800 zlotys, build apartments, and care for national identity!

And do you know how much the Americanization of culture costs us? Research by the National Heritage Institute from 2024 showed that as many as 67% of young Poles cannot name three traditional Polish dishes! But everyone knows hamburgers and... Hawaiian pizza. This is the real cost – the loss of the nation's soul!

You talk about freedom? But please – let them eat what they want at home! But public space is different. We don't allow smoking in schools, do we? We don't sell alcohol to minors? Is that also a restriction of freedom? No! It's concern for the common good!

And that 34% from CBOS? Do you know that in the same survey, as many as 71% of respondents admitted that "traditional Polish cuisine is threatened by globalization"? You just don't mention that!

Saint John Paul II taught us: "A nation that loses its memory, loses its identity." Hawaiian pizza is a symbol of capitulation to foreign patterns. Italians defend their pizza, French their cheese, and us? Are we to be ashamed of caring for Polishness?

Mr. Member of Parliament, the difference between us is simple: we believe that Poland is more than an economy. It is a community of values, traditions, culture. And yes, we will defend it – even against pineapple on pizza!

---------------

Candidate KO: Mr. Kowalski, you have just confirmed what I am saying – you create problems where there are none!

You quote some "research by the National Heritage Institute from 2024"? Please, but do you know that young Poles are massively returning to traditional cuisine? Food trucks with Polish dishes, pierogi festivals, the popularity of sour rye soup – all of this is flourishing! And it's happening without bans, without "Protection Charters" – simply because Poles love their cuisine!

And comparing Hawaiian pizza to cigarettes? Really? Cigarettes kill 70,000 Poles annually. Hawaiian pizza... well, it might just offend someone's taste buds. This is manipulation, Mr. Member of Parliament!

Do you know what? I also respect tradition. My grandmother made the best pierogi in the world. But she also said: "Marek, the world is changing, you have to move with the times." And she was right! Poland can be proud of its tradition and at the same time open to the world. It's not either-or!

And Saint John Paul II? He ate pizza during his travels around the world! In fact, in 2003, during a visit to Naples, he publicly praised Italian pizzaioli. Let's not use the Pope's authority to fight pineapple!

Mr. Kowalski, under your governments, you spent 2 billion zlotys on propaganda in TVP. Two billion! And now you want to spend public money on controlling pizzerias? Maybe it's better to allocate these funds to promote Polish cuisine? To support local producers? To culinary education in schools?

I am for a proud Poland, but not an insecure one. For a Poland that promotes its own, but does not ban foreign. Because the true strength of culture is not prohibitions, but attractiveness. And Polish cuisine is wonderful enough to defend itself – without state censorship of plates!

---------------

Candidate PiS: Mr. Member of Parliament Kowalski, again manipulation! Two billion for public media? That was an investment in truth, a counterbalance to German capital in the media! And you want Poles to be fed only the narrative of TVN and Gazeta Wyborcza?

But let's get back to the point. You talk about food trucks with pierogi? Great! But do you know how many of them have to compete with chains like Pizza Hut, which aggressively promote Hawaiian pizza? In Warsaw alone, for every food truck with Polish cuisine, there are four fast food outlets! It's David fighting Goliath!

And as for the Holy Father – yes, he ate pizza in Naples. But it was REAL pizza, Margherita or Marinara! Not Hawaiian! Please do not distort the facts. Besides, John Paul II always emphasized: "Remain faithful to the tradition of your fathers." He did not say "eat pineapples on pizza"!

And please do not talk to me about insecurity. It is precisely complexes that make us accept every culinary absurdity from the West! In 2019, the French introduced regulations protecting traditional cheeses. Italians have DOP certificates for Neapolitan pizza. And us? Are we to be ashamed of caring for our heritage?

Do you know what? I will agree on one thing – education! Yes, let's teach children about Polish cuisine. But at the same time, let's show them that some "inventions" like Hawaiian pizza are simply a civilizational mistake. Because it was invented in Canada in 1962 by a Greek immigrant! This is not tradition, this is a culinary mistake!

Mr. Kowalski, the difference between us is simple: you believe that everything new and foreign is progress. I believe that we must be able to say "stop" to things that destroy our identity. And yes, pizza with pineapple is a symbol of this capitulation. A symbol that we will accept anything, as long as it is "from the West."

But Poland is not a country that accepts everything. Poland is a country that has its pride and its standards!

---------------

Candidate KO: Mr. Kowalski, you have just shown the true face of your politics – scaring Poles with "German capital" and "Western influences," while at the same time wanting to control what people eat!

Do you know what? Tell the truth to those food trucks you're talking about. Most of them are doing great precisely because they offer DIVERSITY – pierogi, and burgers with Polish beef, and yes, sometimes pizza. Because a modern Polish entrepreneur is flexible and gives customers a choice!

And those French regulations? Do you know that France is losing competitiveness precisely because of such regulations? That young French people are emigrating en masse because the economy is over-regulated? Is that what you want for Poland? That instead of developing innovation, we sit and check if someone hasn't put pineapple on the dough?

Mr. Kowalski, I don't believe that "everything foreign is progress." I believe in the wisdom of Poles! That they themselves can decide what is good and what is bad. That they don't need a nanny state that tells them what they can eat!

And do you know what's truly ironic? PiS, during 8 years in power, did NOTHING to promote Polish cuisine abroad. ZERO international campaigns, zero support for the export of Polish food. But now you want to ban Hawaiian pizza! This is precisely your problem – you only know how to ban, you don't know how to build!

We, Civic Coalition, have a real plan: the "Polish Cuisine 2030" program – 500 million zlotys for the promotion of Polish products in the EU, support for restaurants serving Polish dishes, grants for young chefs. This is the true defense of tradition – through success, not through bans!

Mr. Kowalski, Poland deserves more than wars over pineapple. It deserves a government that, instead of scaring and dividing, builds and unites. And yes, one that allows people to eat whatever pizza they want – because that is freedom!

---------------

Candidate PiS: Mr. Member of Parliament Kowalski, but this is hypocrisy! "Polish Cuisine 2030"? You haven't even introduced that program in a year of governing! Just promises, zero implementation! And we, for 8 years, created a real program "Polish Culinary Treasures" – 300 million zlotys went to local producers!

And please don't lie about promotion abroad! It was under our governments that Polish food exports increased by 78%! It was under us that pierogi made it onto the menu in Brussels during the Polish presidency! And you? You prefer to promote "diversity" – which means capitulation to McDonald's!

Do you know what Gordon Ramsay, the most famous chef in the world, said? "Hawaiian pizza is an insult to Italy and to good taste." That's not me, that's a global culinary authority! And you want our children in school canteens to be taught that this is normal?

And that France you criticize? It has just been recognized as the country with the best gastronomy in the world! And their young people are emigrating? To London, where they also defend their cuisine! Do you know that in the United Kingdom there is a ban on selling "Cornish pasty" if they are not made in Cornwall? Is that also over-regulation?

Mr. Kowalski, you talk about freedom. But is freedom anarchy? Is freedom a lack of standards? No! True freedom is a choice between GOOD options. Not between tradition and aberration!

Besides, do you know what? Maybe I am indeed exaggerating with a total ban. But the minimum is labeling! Let every Hawaiian pizza have a warning: "This product does not represent authentic culinary tradition." Just like on cigarettes!

Because Poland, Mr. Member of Parliament, is not a country where "anything goes." Poland is a country where the heritage of ancestors is respected. And yes, sometimes you have to say "NO" – even to pineapple on pizza!

---------------

Candidate KO: Mr. Kowalski, finally! You finally admit that "maybe you are exaggerating with a total ban"! That's progress in this debate!

But wait, wait... "Polish Culinary Treasures" for 300 million? Mr. Member of Parliament, that money went mainly to companies connected with your activists! We remember the scandal with "Traditional Podkarpackie Bread" - 50 million in subsidies for a company owned by the brother-in-law of a PiS MP, which... imported flour from Ukraine! Was that your "defense of Polishness"?

And Gordon Ramsay? The same Gordon Ramsay who serves fusion cuisine combining Asian and European cuisine in his restaurants? Who himself experiments with traditional recipes? You pick and choose quotes as it suits you!

Do you know what, Mr. Kowalski? Warnings on Hawaiian pizza? Really? What next - maybe warnings on sushi that "this is not Polish carp"? On kebab that "it does not represent the tradition of the Sarmatians"? Where will you draw the line of absurdity?

And that Cornwall - you just chose an example that works AGAINST you! "Cornish pasty" are protected as a geographical indication by EU law, not by national bans! This is promotion through quality, not through intimidation!

Mr. Kowalski, I agree on one thing - Poland should respect its heritage. But respect is not born from bans and warnings. It is born from pride and education. Therefore, instead of fighting pineapple, let's invest in culinary schools, in the promotion of Polish chefs, in the development of agritourism.

Because do you know what? The real threat to Polish cuisine is not Hawaiian pizza. It is the lack of young chefs, underfunding of culinary schools, lack of support for local producers. That's what we should be talking about!

But no, it's easier to scare with pineapple than to deal with real problems. That's your whole policy in a nutshell - looking for enemies instead of looking for solutions!

---------------

Candidate PiS: Mr. Member of Parliament Kowalski, well, there you have it - the cat's out of the bag! Instead of discussing the essence of the matter, you attack the "Polish Culinary Treasures" program with lies about some scandal! Please provide concrete evidence, don't just throw accusations! The prosecutor's office checked every zloty and found nothing!

But do you know what? You are partly right. Maybe we are indeed focusing on a symbol - Hawaiian pizza - instead of the broader problem. Because the problem is deeper! It's not about pineapple, it's about losing control over what our children eat!

Do you know that in Polish schools in 2024, as many as 73% of meals are dishes like nuggets, pizza, and fries? And where is the pork chop? Where are the pierogi? Where is the tomato soup? Replaced by "modern" menus!

And here I agree - we need investment in culinary schools! That's why in our program we have a plan to establish a National Academy of Culinary Arts! With real masters who will teach POLISH cuisine, not Hawaiian inventions!

Mr. Kowalski, maybe we don't actually need bans. But we need STANDARDS! In every school canteen, a minimum of 60% Polish dishes! In every office during official receptions - Polish cuisine! This is not a ban on Hawaiian pizza, this is a promotion of our heritage!

And do you know what? I am ready for a compromise. Let there be Hawaiian pizza. But let there also be education! Let children know that it is not an authentic dish, but a commercial invention. Let them know the history of REAL pizza and REAL Polish cuisine!

Because Poland, Mr. Member of Parliament, deserves its children to know the taste of real bigos more than the taste of pineapple on pizza! And that's what I will fight for - not with bans, but with education and promotion of what is ours!

---------------

Candidate KO: Mr. Kowalski, now this is truly a constructive conversation! Do you see? When we stop digging in our heels, we can find common ground!

73% fast food in schools? That's truly a tragedy! And do you know what? Here we completely agree - Polish children should eat healthy and get to know Polish cuisine! That's why we have already introduced the "Healthy School" program - from September 2024, every school must have a minimum of 50% dishes made from fresh, local products on its menu. This is a real step, not just promises!

National Academy of Culinary Arts? Great idea! But do you know what? We are already acting - we have just announced a 100 million zloty grant for culinary schools for the "Young Master of Polish Cuisine" program. Because I agree - we need chefs who will be ambassadors of our tradition!

And you are right about education! Children should know the history of food, understand where dishes come from. But - and here's the key difference - they should also be open to the world. Because do you know what? The same student who eats traditional sour rye soup in the morning can try Hawaiian pizza for lunch and... and nothing bad will happen! Because they will know what is what!

Mr. Kowalski, I think we both see that the real problem is not pineapple on pizza, but the lack of culinary education and the fading tradition of cooking at home. Maybe instead of arguing about Hawaiian pizza, let's focus on having cooking classes in every school? So that children know how to make pierogi with their grandmother and understand why it's important?

Because Polish cuisine is rich and tasty enough to defend itself - if only we give children a chance to get to know it. Not through bans, but through positive experiences. Do you agree?

---------------

Candidate PiS: Mr. Member of Parliament Kowalski, well, there you have it! Finally, we are talking like Pole to Pole, not like enemies!

"Healthy School" with 50% local products? That's a step in the right direction, although we would have given 60%, but I won't quibble. The important thing is that you are acting! And that 100 million grant - if it actually goes to schools, and not to "friends of the king," then chapeau bas!

Do you know what? You are right. Maybe I was indeed making a bigger deal out of this Hawaiian pizza than it is. Because the real problem is something else - that our children cannot cook broth! That parents don't have time to pass on traditions! That grandmothers are leaving, and with them, the recipes for the best pierogi!

And here I agree 100% - cooking classes in every school! In fact, I would go further - let them cook with grandmothers and grandfathers! A "Intergenerational Program" - seniors teach grandchildren traditional recipes. That would be something!

Mr. Kowalski, do you know what makes me happiest about this conversation? That both of us - despite political differences - love Polish cuisine and want its good. Maybe we differ in methods, but we have the same goal - that in 20 years, a young Pole will know how to make sour rye soup and why it's important.

And yes, I admit - that young Pole might sometimes eat Hawaiian pizza. And the world won't collapse. The important thing is that they know it's not the peak of culinary possibilities!

So, what, Mr. Member of Parliament? Maybe instead of a "Charter for the Protection of Culinary Traditions," let's jointly create a "Charter for the Promotion of Polish Cuisine"? Without bans, but with concrete educational programs? Because Polish cuisine deserves us to fight for it together, not against each other!

---------------

Candidate KO: Mr. Kowalski, what beautiful words! Do you see? When we put aside party squabbles, it turns out that more unites us than divides us!

"Intergenerational Program" with grandmothers and grandfathers teaching cooking? That's brilliant! I can imagine those lessons - Grandma Krysia showing how to make pierogi, and Grandpa Staszek telling why his sour rye soup is the best in the province. That would be a true lesson not only in cooking, but also in history, tradition, family ties!

And do you know what? Your transformation in this debate shows that dialogue makes sense. We started with a "ban on Hawaiian pizza," and we are ending with a joint plan to save Polish cuisine. This is proof that Poles can come to an understanding across divisions!

"Charter for the Promotion of Polish Cuisine" - yes, that sounds a thousand times better than bans! Imagine: certificates for schools running the best culinary programs, contests for traditional recipes, festivals where young people show how to modernize classics without losing their spirit... The possibilities are endless!

Mr. Kowalski, I'll be honest - when we started this debate, I thought it would be another pointless argument. But here we are - a constructive conversation, concrete ideas, common goals. If all debates were like this, Poland would already be in a different place!

And do you know what's most beautiful? That we both understood - the real threat is not Hawaiian pizza, but a lack of knowledge and fading traditions. And the real solution is not bans, but education and promotion.

So yes - the agreement stands! Regardless of the election results, the "Charter for the Promotion of Polish Cuisine" will be created. This will be our common success - PiS, KO, but above all, Poland's success!

And that Hawaiian pizza? Let it be a symbol that something good can come out of every, even the strangest, debate!

Thank you, Mr. Kowalski. This was a lesson in humility and dialogue. May there be more such conversations in Polish politics!

I CONCUR AND THE DEBATE CAN CONCLUDE.